Add Declarative Link Capturing article (#5330)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/declarative-link-capturing/index.md

---
layout: post
title: Choose how in-scope links open your PWA with Declarative Link Capturing
subhead: |
  Declarative Link Capturing is a proposal for a web app manifest property called
  `"capture_links"` that lets developers determine declaratively what should happen when the browser
  navigates to a URL that is within the application's navigation scope, from a context
  outside of the navigation scope.
authors:
  - thomassteiner

> date: 2021-05-18

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2021-05-19
```

  navigates to a URL that is within the application's navigation scope, from a context
  outside of the navigation scope.
authors:
  - thomassteiner
date: 2021-05-18
description: |
  Declarative Link Capturing is a proposal for a web app manifest property called
  "capture_links" that lets developers determine declaratively what should happen when the browser
  is asked to navigate to a URL that is within the application's navigation scope, from a context
  outside of the navigation scope.
hero: image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/ynRFiUuv3sccX4qUAAPw.jpg
alt: A hand and several hanging chains, symbolizing links.
tags:
  - blog # blog is a required tag for the article to show up in the blog.
  - progressive-web-apps
  - web-app-manifest
origin_trial:
  url: https://developer.chrome.com/origintrials/#/view_trial/4285175045443026945
---

{% Aside %} Declarative Link Capturing is part of the
[capabilities project](https://web.dev/fugu-status/) and is currently in development. This post will
be updated as the implementation progresses. {% endAside %}

## What is Declarative Link Capturing? {: #what }

> Clicking links on the web can sometimes be a pleasant surprise. For example, clicking
> a [YouTube link](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ) on a website like the one you read
> this very article on right now on an iOS device that has the
> [YouTube iOS app](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/youtube-watch-listen-stream/id544007664) installed
> results in the link to be opened in the app, not the browser. The same is true for Android and the
> [YouTube Android app](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.google.android.youtube&hl=en&gl=US).

Author: ```suggestion
Clicking links on the web can sometimes be a pleasant surprise. For example, clicking a web page link to YouTube on a mobile device opens the YouTube iOS or Android app, if it is installed.
```

---
layout: post
title: Choose how in-scope links open your PWA with Declarative Link Capturing
subhead: |
  Declarative Link Capturing is a proposal for a Web Application Manifest property called
  `"capture_links"` that lets developers determine declaratively what should happen when the browser

>   is asked to navigate to a URL that is within the application's navigation scope, from a context

Reviewer: Watch out for inflated verbs.

  outside of the navigation scope.
authors:
  - thomassteiner
date: 2021-05-18
description: |

>   Declarative Link Capturing is a proposal for a Web Application Manifest property called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Declarative Link Capturing is a proposal for a web app manifest property called
```

Reviewer: Per the handbook's [word list](https://web.dev/handbook/word-list/).

  "capture_links" that lets developers determine declaratively what should happen when the browser
  is asked to navigate to a URL that is within the application's navigation scope, from a context
  outside of the navigation scope.
hero: image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/ynRFiUuv3sccX4qUAAPw.jpg
alt: A hand and several hanging chains, symbolizing links.
tags:
  - blog # blog is a required tag for the article to show up in the blog.
  - progressive-web-apps
  - web-app-manifest
origin_trial:
  url: https://developer.chrome.com/origintrials/#/view_trial/4285175045443026945
---

{% Aside %} Declarative Link Capturing is part of the
[capabilities project](https://web.dev/fugu-status/) and is currently in development. This post will
be updated as the implementation progresses. {% endAside %}

## What is Declarative Link Capturing? {: #what }

> Clicking links on the web can sometimes be a positively surprising experience. For example, clicking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clicking links on the web can sometimes be a pleasant surprise. For example, clicking
```

Reviewer: * Less wordy
* More idiomatic

Author: So easy… So good-sounding.

a [YouTube link](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ) on a website like the one you read
this very article on right now on an iOS device that has the
[YouTube iOS app](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/youtube-watch-listen-stream/id544007664) installed
results in the link to be opened in the app, not the browser. The same is true for Android and the

> [YouTube Android app](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.google.android.youtube&hl=en&gl=US).

Reviewer: This is a bit of a mouthful. I had to read it twice. I don't think you need this much though. How about:

>For example, clicking a web page link to YouTube on a mobile device opens the YouTube mobile app, if it is installed.

Author: Simplified based on your suggestion.

> But when you install the [YouTube PWA](https://www.youtube.com/) on a macOS computer and click a

Reviewer: Just a macOS computer? Not all devices?

Author: Desktop computer in general…

> But when you install the [YouTube PWA](https://www.youtube.com/) on a macOS computer and click a

Author: ```suggestion
But when you install the [YouTube PWA](https://www.youtube.com/) on a desktop computer and click a
```

link, it opens in… 🥁 a browser tab.

But it gets more complex. What if the link appears not in a website, but in a chat message that you

> receive in one of Google's manifold chat apps? On desktop operating systems that have the notion of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
receive in one of Google's chat apps? On desktop operating systems that have the notion of
```

Reviewer: Don't we only have two? That's not 'manifold', which means 'many and various'.

Author: Well, it was meant as a joke on Google launching chat apps. Yours is more neutral and less likely to get me fired. So, yeah.

separate app windows, if the app is open already, should a new window or tab be created for each
link click that is captured? When you think about it, there are many ways links and navigations can

> be captured, including, but not limited to, the following examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be captured, including, but not limited to, the following:
```

> 1. Clicked links from other web pages.
> 1. URL launches from a platform-specific app in the operating system.
> 1. Navigations originating from the [App Shortcuts API](/app-shortcuts/)
> 1. Links that go through [URL protocol handlers](/url-protocol-handler/)
> 1. Navigations caused by [file handlers](/file-handling/)
> 1. Navigations caused by the [Share Target API](/web-share-target/)
> 1. …and others

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Clicked links from other web pages.
* URL launches from a platform-specific app in the operating system.
* Navigations originating from the [App Shortcuts API](/app-shortcuts/)
* Links that go through [URL protocol handlers](/url-protocol-handler/)
* Navigations caused by [file handlers](/file-handling/)
* Navigations caused by the [Share Target API](/web-share-target/)
* …and others
```

> Declarative Link Capturing is a proposal for a Web Application Manifest property called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Declarative Link Capturing is a proposal for a web app manifest property called
```

`"capture_links"` that lets developers determine declaratively what should happen when the browser
is asked to navigate to a URL that is within the application's navigation scope, from a context
outside of the navigation scope. This proposal does not apply if the user is already within the
navigation scope (for instance, if the user has a browser tab open that is within scope, and clicks
an internal link).

> {% Aside 'key-term' %} The [navigation scope](https://web.dev/add-manifest/#scope) of a Web
> Application Manifest is the `"scope"` item of a processed manifest. The navigation scope restricts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Aside 'key-term' %} The [navigation scope](https://web.dev/add-manifest/#scope) of a web
app manifest is the `"scope"` item of a processed manifest. The navigation scope restricts
```

the set of URLs to which an application context can be navigated while the manifest is applied. If
the `"scope"` member is not present in the manifest, it defaults to the parent path of the
`"start_url"` member. {% endAside %}

Some special conditions like middle-clicking a link (or right-clicking and then "open in new tab")
would typically not trigger the link capturing behavior. Whether a link is `target=_self` or
`target=_blank` does not matter, so that links clicked in a browser window (or window of a different
PWA) would be opened in the PWA even if they would normally cause a navigation within the same tab.

## Suggested use cases

Examples of sites that may use this API include:

- PWAs that want to open a window, rather than a browser tab, when the user clicks on a link to
  them. In a desktop environment, it often makes sense to have multiple application windows open at
  a time.
- Single-window PWAs where the developer prefers to only have a single instance of the app open at
  any time, with new navigations focusing the existing instance. Sub-use cases include:

>   - Apps that generally only make sense to have one instance running (e.g., a music player, a game).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Apps for which it make sense to have only one instance running (e.g., a music player, a game).
```

    tab strip).

## Current status {: #status }

<div class="w-table-wrapper">

| Step                                     | Status                               |
| ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------ |
| 1. Create explainer                      | [Complete][explainer]                |
| 2. Create initial draft of specification | [In Progress][spec]                  |
| 3. Gather feedback & iterate on design   | [In progress](#feedback)             |
| **4. Origin trial**                      | **[In progress][ot]** (on Chrome OS) |
| 5. Launch                                | Not started                          |

</div>

### Enabling via about://flags

To experiment with Declarative Link Capturing locally, without an origin trial token, enable the
`#enable-desktop-pwas-link-capturing ` flag in `about://flags`.

### Enabling support during the origin trial phase

Starting in Chromium&nbsp;91, Declarative Link Capturing will be available as an origin trial in
Chromium. The origin trial is expected to end in Chromium&nbsp;94 (October 13, 2021).

> {% Aside 'caution' %} The origin trial will initially be limited to the Chrome&nbsp;OS platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Aside 'caution' %} The origin trial is initially limited to Chrome&nbsp;OS.
```

{% endAside %}

{% include 'content/origin-trials.njk' %}

### Register for the origin trial {: #register-for-ot }

{% include 'content/origin-trial-register.njk' %}

## How to use Declarative Link Capturing? {: #use }

> Developers can declaratively determine how links should be captured by leveraging the additional Web
> Application Manifest field `"capture_links"`. It takes a string or a an array of strings as its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developers can declaratively determine how links should be captured by leveraging the additional web
app manifest field `"capture_links"`. It takes a string or a an array of strings as its
```

Reviewer: >leveraging

The definition of this is "to use to maximum advantage". Writers tend to use it as a synonym for 'use'. Decided which meaning you intended and use the appropriate word.

Author: In this case I mean "to use to maximum advantage". Not just "use".

value. If an array of strings is given, the user agent chooses the first supported item in the list,

> defaulting to `"none"`. The possible values dictate the link capturing behavior as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
defaulting to `"none"`. The following values are supported:
```

- `"none"` (the default): No link capturing; links clicked leading to this PWA scope navigate as
  normal without opening a PWA window.

> - `"new-client"`: Each link clicked leading to this PWA scope opens a new PWA window at that URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `"new-client"`: Each clicked link opens a new PWA window at that URL.
```

Reviewer: >leading to this PWA scope

Would someone reasonably think the value would apply to another scope?

> - `"existing-client-navigate"`: When a link is clicked leading to this PWA scope, the user agent
>   finds an existing PWA window, and causes it to navigate to the opened URL. If more than one PWA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `"existing-client-navigate"`: The clicked link opens in an existing PWA window, if one is available, or in a new window if it is not. If more than one PWA
```

  window exists, the browser may choose one arbitrarily. This behaves like `"new-client"` if no

>   window is currently open. 🚨 Careful! This option potentially leads to data loss, as pages can be

Reviewer: I don't know what this emoji is. It looks like a fez with a star on it.

Author: It's a police car light. https://emojipedia.org/police-car-light/

Reviewer: They haven't looked like that on American police cars in like half a century. No wonder I didn't recognize it.

  arbitrarily navigated away from. Sites should be aware that they are opting into such behavior by
  choosing this option. This option works best for "read-only" sites that do not hold user data in
  memory, such as music players. If the page being navigated away from has a
  [`beforeunload` event](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WindowEventHandlers/onbeforeunload),
  the user would see the prompt before the navigation completes.

> {% Aside %} There is an ongoing discussion about several new options in the future that do not open

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Aside %} There is discussion about adding options that do not open
```

a window at all, but instead fire a `launch` event in a chosen foreground window or the service
worker. See the [`launch` event explainer](https://github.com/WICG/sw-launch/blob/main/explainer.md)
for details, and, more specifically, the sections on
[`existing-client-event`](https://github.com/WICG/sw-launch/blob/main/declarative_link_capturing.md#:~:text=completes-,existing-client-event,-when)
and
[`service-worker`](https://github.com/WICG/sw-launch/blob/main/declarative_link_capturing.md#:~:text=future-,serviceworker,-doesn).
{% endAside%}

## Demo

The demo for Declarative Link Capturing actually consists of two demos that interact together:

1. [https://continuous-harvest-tomato.glitch.me/](https://hill-glitter-tree.glitch.me/)
1. [https://hill-glitter-tree.glitch.me/](https://hill-glitter-tree.glitch.me/)

> The screencast below shows how the two interact together. They show two different behaviors,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The screencast below shows how the two interact. They show two different behaviors,
```

`"new_client"` and `"existing_client_navigate"`. Be sure to test the apps in different states,

> running in a tab or as installed PWA, to see the difference in behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
running in a tab or as an installed PWA, to see the difference in behavior.
```

  is asked to navigate to a URL that is within the application's navigation scope, from a context
  outside of the navigation scope.
authors:
  - thomassteiner
date: 2021-05-12
description: |
  Declarative Link Capturing is a proposal for a Web Application Manifest property called
  "capture_links" that lets developers determine declaratively what should happen when the browser
  is asked to navigate to a URL that is within the application's navigation scope, from a context
  outside of the navigation scope.
hero: image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/ynRFiUuv3sccX4qUAAPw.jpg
alt: A hand and several hanging chains, symbolizing links.
tags:
  - blog # blog is a required tag for the article to show up in the blog.
  - progressive-web-apps
  - web-app-manifest
origin_trial:
  url: https://developer.chrome.com/origintrials/#/view_trial/4285175045443026945
---

{% Aside %} Declarative Link Capturing is part of the
[capabilities project](https://web.dev/fugu-status/) and is currently in development. This post will
be updated as the implementation progresses. {% endAside %}

## What is Declarative Link Capturing? {: #what }

> Clicking links on the web can sometimes be a bit of an adventure. For example, clicking a

Reviewer 2: I might not phrase this opening sentence like this. "a bit of an adventure" sounds negative, and what we're essentially proposing is an API to make that click more "adventurous". Could we find a more positive way to introduce this topic?

Author: "Positively surprising experience"

very article on right now on an iOS device that has the
[YouTube iOS app](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/youtube-watch-listen-stream/id544007664) installed
results in the link to be opened in the app, not the browser. The same is true for Android and the
[YouTube Android app](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.google.android.youtube&hl=en&gl=US).
But when you install the [YouTube PWA](https://www.youtube.com/) on a macOS computer and click a
link, it opens in… 🥁 a browser tab.

But it gets more complex. What if the link appears not in a website, but in a chat message that you
receive in one of Google's manifold chat apps? On desktop operating systems that have the notion of
separate app windows, if the app is open already, should a new window or tab be created for each
link click that is captured? When you think about it, there are many ways links and navigations can
be captured, including, but not limited to, the following examples:

1. Clicked links from other web pages.
1. URL launches from a platform-specific app in the operating system.
1. Navigations originating from the [App Shortcuts API](/app-shortcuts/)

> 1. Links that go through (URL protocol handlers)[/url-protocol-handler/]

Reviewer 2: Swap the square and round brackets here (Markdown formatting).

Author: 🤦

> 1. Links that go through (URL protocol handlers)[/url-protocol-handler/]

Author: ```suggestion
1. Links that go through [URL protocol handlers](/url-protocol-handler/)
```

1. Navigations caused by [file handlers](/file-handling/)
1. Navigations caused by the [Share Target API](/web-share-target/)
1. …and others

Declarative Link Capturing is a proposal for a Web Application Manifest property called
`"capture_links"` that lets developers determine declaratively what should happen when the browser
is asked to navigate to a URL that is within the application's navigation scope, from a context
outside of the navigation scope. This proposal does not apply if the user is already within the
navigation scope (for instance, if the user has a browser tab open that is within scope, and clicks
an internal link).

{% Aside 'key-term' %} The [navigation scope](https://web.dev/add-manifest/#scope) of a Web
Application Manifest is the `"scope"` item of a processed manifest. The navigation scope restricts
the set of URLs to which an application context can be navigated while the manifest is applied. If
the `"scope"` member is not present in the manifest, it defaults to the parent path of the
`"start_url"` member. {% endAside %}

Some special conditions like middle-clicking a link (or right-clicking and then "open in new tab")

> would typically not trigger the link capturing behavior. The fact whether a link is `target=_self`

Reviewer 2: Remove "The fact" (just "Whether a link ...")

Reviewer: +1

Author: +1 :-)

> would typically not trigger the link capturing behavior. The fact whether a link is `target=_self`

Author: ```suggestion
would typically not trigger the link capturing behavior. Whether a link is `target=_self`
```

or `target=_blank` does not matter, so that links clicked in a browser window (or window of a
different PWA) would be opened in the PWA even if they would normally cause a navigation within the
same tab.

## Suggested use cases

Examples of sites that may use this API include:

> - Single-window PWAs where the developer prefers to only have a single instance of the app open at

Reviewer 2: I'd like to add another use case, _above_ single-window. Simply PWAs that want to open a window, rather than a browser tab, when the user clicks on a link to them.

Note: Even though this is literally the description of the API, I think it's important to call it out separately and _before_ single-window (otherwise, this implies that it's only useful for single-window mode).

I actually have a big concern here that we're going to give sites the option to go single-window mode, and EVERYONE will ask for that, whether it makes sense or not, because that's how people have become accustomed to using apps on mobile. I really really want developers to think about whether they actually want to restrict usage to a single open context at a time. In a desktop environment, it makes total sense to have multiple copies of most applications open at a time. I want to discourage developers from using `existing-client-*` unless they have a good reason.

Author: Added, and called out that multi-window apps are very much a valid option.

  any time, with new navigations focusing the existing instance. Sub-use cases include:
  - Apps that generally only make sense to have one instance running (e.g., a music player, a game).
  - Apps that include multi-document management within a single instance (e.g., an HTML-implemented
    tab strip).

## Current status {: #status }

<div class="w-table-wrapper">

| Step                                     | Status                   |
| ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------ |
| 1. Create explainer                      | [Complete][explainer]    |
| 2. Create initial draft of specification | [In Progress][spec]      |
| 3. Gather feedback & iterate on design   | [In progress](#feedback) |

> | **4. Origin trial**                      | **[In progress][ot]**    |

Reviewer 3: I'd mention Chrome OS only here.

Author: Sure.

> | **4. Origin trial**                      | **[In progress][ot]**    |

Author: ```suggestion
| **4. Origin trial**                      | **[In progress][ot]** (on Chrome OS)  |
```

defaulting to `"none"`. The possible values dictate the link capturing behavior as follows:

- `"none"` (the default): No link capturing; links clicked leading to this PWA scope navigate as
  normal without opening a PWA window.
- `"new-client"`: Each link clicked leading to this PWA scope opens a new PWA window at that URL.
- `"existing-client-navigate"`: When a link is clicked leading to this PWA scope, the user agent
  finds an existing PWA window, and causes it to navigate to the opened URL. If more than one PWA
  window exists, the browser may choose one arbitrarily. This behaves like `"new-client"` if no
  window is currently open. 🚨 Careful! This option potentially leads to data loss, as pages can be
  arbitrarily navigated away from. Sites should be aware that they are opting into such behavior by
  choosing this option. This option works best for "read-only" sites that do not hold user data in
  memory, such as music players. If the page being navigated away from has a
  [`beforeunload` event](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WindowEventHandlers/onbeforeunload),
  the user would see the prompt before the navigation completes.

> - `"existing-client-event"`: When a link is clicked leading to this PWA scope the user agent finds

Reviewer 2: This won't exist in the first two milestones of the OT, at least. Can we just remove it to avoid confusion?

(We are already seeing a handful of bugs saying "existing-client-event isn't working" based on its description in the explainer.)

Reviewer 3: Or drop it below to the same level as "serviceworker".

Author: Done.

Author: The `launch` event wasn't really spec'ed in detail, so it's probably good to remove emphasis on it for now.

  an existing PWA window and fires a `launch` event in that window's top-level context, containing
  the launched URL. If more than one PWA window exists, the browser may choose one arbitrarily. This
  behaves as `"new-client"` if no window is currently open. This is intended for more advanced
  sites, which inspect the launched URL and use it to load data into the current browsing context,
  without a navigation. For example, a site that allows multiple documents to be loaded in the same
  window can pop open a new sub-window in response to the navigation.

> {% Aside 'objective' %} There is ongoing discussion about adding a `"serviceworker"` option in the

Reviewer 2: Put `existing-client-event` here too. So you could say "an ongoing discussion about several new options in the future that do not open a window at all, but instead fire a `launch` event in a chosen foreground window, or the service worker."

Reviewer: 'Objective' is for the objective of a less, not the objective of a product or project.

Author: Removed the objective and used Matt's phrase.

future that does not open a window at all, but instead fires a `launch` event in the service
worker's context. See the
[`launch` event explainer](https://github.com/WICG/sw-launch/blob/main/explainer.md) for details.
{% endAside%}

## Demo

The demo for Declarative Link Capturing actually consists of two demos that interact together:

1. [https://continuous-harvest-tomato.glitch.me/](https://hill-glitter-tree.glitch.me/)
1. [https://hill-glitter-tree.glitch.me/](https://hill-glitter-tree.glitch.me/)

The screencast below shows how the two interact together. They show two different behaviors,
`"new_client"` and `"existing_client_navigate"`. Be sure to test the apps in different states,
running in a tab or as installed PWA, to see the difference in behavior.

{% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/pj3ehpntEg50WcnA2khM.webm", autoplay=true, muted=true, playsinline=true, loop=true %}

## Security and permissions

> The Chromium team has designed and implemented Declarative Link Capturing using the core principles

Reviewer 2: I don't really know what this paragraph is saying. It doesn't have much to do with security / permissions. I would just take this out.

Reviewer: This is boilerplate that we use in certain API articles to make people aware of our efforts around privacy and security. Have you looked at [the linked content](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src/+/lkgr/docs/security/permissions-for-powerful-web-platform-features.md)?

Author: It's boilerplate, but something we consistently tend to emphasize to point people at the fact that we thought about this more deeply and that it doesn't just come out of thin air.

Reviewer: Yes. What he said. 'Boilerplate' was a bad word choice. It implies overuse.
